Add developing-without-a-build initial draft (#1)
LarsDenBakker/blog-posts: developing-without-a-build/article.md

> # Developing without a build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Developing Without a Build
```

Title Case All your Headings

> In the early days of web development all we needed was a simple file editor and a web server. The development experience was really simple, and easy for a newcomer to understand and get started. Web development has changed a lot since then, the complexity of the tools we use for development has grown just as much as the complexity of the things that we're building on the web.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the early days of web development, all we needed was a simple file editor and a web server. It was easy for a newcomer to understand the process and get started making their own web pages. Web development has changed a lot since then: the complexity of the tools we use for development has grown just as much as the complexity of the things that we're building on the web.
```

Author: We actually need to configure source maps for development too :) Updating this one slightly

> These tools can be really complex, projects can set up systems which transform different syntaxes and dialects into bundles we can run in the browser. Source maps need to be configured carefully between the different tools, so that we can still recognize and debug our code in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays, developers can set up systems which transform their code from one syntax to another, turning code that would crash any web browser into code that runs on most or all browsers. To aid debugging, source maps need to be configured carefully between the different tools, so that we can still recognize and debug our code in production, where it matters most.
```

> Imagine a new person coming into web development, even experienced developers, they first need to learn about a lot of different tools before they can get to actual development. Their IDE and linter don't understand the syntax of this framework that was recommended to them by a friend. Installing a few extra plugins solved that. After that they ran into some more errors... Turns out they wanted to keep it simple and not use typescript, but they didn't configure the babel plugins for decorators correctly in the right order so the project didn't compile. Oops!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine whats it's like for a newcomer or even an experienced web developer:
- They first need to learn a lot of different tools before they can get their code to actually run
- Their IDE and linter didn't understand the syntax of the framework that was recommended to them by a friend, so they had to install a few extra plugins
- After that they ran into some more errors... Turns out they wanted to keep it simple and not use typescript, but they didn't configure the babel plugins for decorators correctly in the right order so the project didn't compile. 

Oops!
```

> It sounds exaggerated, but these things are really happening to people. I feel that's really a shame. One of the key selling points of the web is that's an easy and open format. It should also be easy to just get started right away without a lot of ceremony.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may sound exaggerated, but this experience is common to a lot of developers. You may have jumped through similar hoops yourself only to think "this is just the way modern web development is".

I feel that's really a shame. One of the key selling points of the web is and always was that's an easy and open format. It should be easy to just get started right away without a lot of configuration, tooling, pomp, and ceremony.
```

I'm not criticizing any of the tools, they have a role and a purpose. And for a long time it was the only real way to build complex applications on the web, as the web standards and browser implementations were just not there to support modern web development. They really helped push web development forward.

> However nowadays I think build tools and bundlers should be primarily for production optimization, for development I think we can go back to basics. Browser support for es module features has improved a lot in recent years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However nowadays I think build tools and bundlers should be primarily for production optimization, for development I think we can go back to basics, and the improved browser support for es modules in recent years has made this possible.
```

> In this article we will explore different ways of loading modules in the browser, and offer practical advice on how to handle different scenarios. We will start by looking at javascript modules, and later look at html, css and json as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we will explore module loading in the browser, and offer practical advice on how to handle different scenarios. We will start by looking at JavaScript modules, and later look at HTML, CSS, and JSON as well.
```

## Loading modules in the browser

> This is not exact step by step tutorial, but you can follow along with any of the examples by using any simple web server. For example `http-server` from npm. Run it with `-c-1` to disable time based caching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not an exact step by step tutorial, but you can follow along with any of the examples by using any simple web server. For example `http-server` from npm. Run it with `-c-1` to disable time based caching.
```

```bash
npm i -D http-server
npx http-server -o -c-1
```

### Loading modules
Modules are loaded in the browser using regular script tags with a `type="module"` attribute. We can just write our module code directly inline:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head></head>

<body>
  <script type="module">
    console.log('hello world!');
  </script>
</body>

</html>
```

From here we can use static imports to load other modules:
```html
<script type="module">
  import './app.js';

  console.log('hello world!');
</script>
```

> Note that we need to use an explicit file extension, as the browser doesn't know which file to request otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we need to use an explicit file extension, as the browser doesn't know which file to request otherwise, so if you're used to writing imports like `import _ from 'lodash-es'`, you'll have to change them to `import _ from '/node_modules/lodash-es/index.js''`. More on that later.
```

<script type="module" src="./app.js"></script>
```

### Loading dependencies
We don't write our code in just one file. After importing the initial module, we can import other modules. For example let's create two new files:

`src/app.js`:
```javascript
import { message } from './message.js';

console.log(`The message is: ${message}`);
```

`src/message.js`:
```js
export const message = 'hello world';
```

Place both files in a `src` directory and import `app.js` from your index.html:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head></head>

<body>
  <script type="module" src="./src/app.js"></script>
</body>

</html>
```

If you run this and check the network panel, you will see both modules being loaded. Because imports are resolved relatively, `app.js` can refer to `message.js` using a relative path:

![](./images/modules.png)

This seems trivial, but it is extremely useful and something we did not have before with classic scripts. We no longer need to coordinate dependencies somewhere central or maintain a base url. Modules can declare their own dependencies, and we can import any module without knowing what their dependencies are. The browser takes care of requesting the correct files.

> ### Dynamic imports

Reviewer: You should note that dynamic import()s, since they initiate their own module graph, can be used even in scripts

```html
<script>
  import('./message.js')
    .then(({ message }) => message)
    .then(console.log)
</script>
```

When building any serious web application we are usually going to need to do some form of lazy loading for best performance. With the browser's module system we can do this using dynamic imports. Static imports like we saw before always need to exist on the top level.

For example we cannot write:
```javascript
if (someCondition) {
  import './bar.js';
}
```

This is what dynamic imports are for. Dynamic imports can import a module at any time. It returns a promise that resolves with the imported module.

For example let's update the `app.js` example we created above:
```javascript
window.addEventListener('click', async () => {
  const module = await import('./message.js');

  console.log(`The message is: ${module.message}`);
});
```

Now we are not importing the message module right away, but delaying it until the user has clicked anywhere on the page. We can await the promise returned from the import and interact with the modules. Any exported members are avaible on the module object.

### Lazy evaluation

> This is where developing without a bundler has a significant benefit. If you bundle your application before serving it to the browser, the bundler needs to evaluate all your dynamic imports to do code splitting and output separate chunks. For large applications with a lot of dynamic imports this can add significant overhead as the entire application is built and bundled before you can see anything anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where developing without a bundler has a significant benefit. If you bundle your application before serving it to the browser, the bundler needs to evaluate all your dynamic imports to do code splitting and output separate chunks. For large applications with a lot of dynamic imports this can add significant overhead as the entire application is built and bundled before you can see anything.
```

> When serving unbundled modules the entire process is lazy, the browser only does the necessary work for loading the requested modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When serving unbundled modules, the entire process is lazy. The browser only does the necessary work to loading the modules that were actually requested.
```

![](./images/lodash-es.png)

Writing explicit paths to your node modules folder is a bit unusual. While it works just fine, most people are used to writing what's called a bare import specifier:
```javascript
import { kebabCase } from 'lodash-es';
import kebabCase from 'lodash-es/kebabCase.js';
```

This doesn't work in the browser out of the box, as it doesn't know what file to request when it sees this path. Luckily there is a [new browser API called import maps](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) which lets you instruct the browser how to resolve these imports:
```html
<script type="importmap">
  {
    "imports": {
      "lodash-es": "./node_modules/lodash-es/lodash.js",
      "lodash-es/": "./node_modules/lodash-es/"
    }
  }
</script>
```

It's currently [implemented in chrome behind a flag](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/03/kv-storage#import_maps), and it's easy to shim on other browsers [with es-module-shims](https://www.npmjs.com/package/es-module-shims). Until we get broad browser support, that can be an interesting option during development.

> If you don't want to go quite as cutting edge but still want to use the bare imports a great option is to use a web server which rewrites the bare imports on the fly into explicit paths before serving them to the browser. There are some quite servers available that do this. Of course I recommend [es-dev-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/es-dev-server) since I wrote it myself :)

Reviewer 2: "Of course I recommend [es-dev-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/es-dev-server) since I wrote it myself :)"
that is not a good reason for others use something :p
also it sounds like it's a one man show... lessens the value I my eyes 🙈

better be very explicit and explain why you use it or just mention that it's the one you are using in this blog post

Author: Good point... do you think we should not mention at all that we're promoting our own tool?

Reviewer: say "Open Web Components recommends our `es-dev-server`. It's A, B, C, and D, which help you get things done" where A B C and D are advantages to our product

Over time web frameworks have solved html templating in different ways, for example by placing HTML inside javascript strings. Lately JSX has become a popular format for embedding HTML inside javascript, but it is not going to run natively in the browser without some kind of transformation.

With es2015/es6 we can use tagged template string literals to embed html inside js, and use it for doing efficient DOM updates. This runs natively in the browser and still offers a great developer experience. There are some really good production ready and feature complete libraries that can be used for this:

- [htm, JSX using template literals. Works with libraries that use JSX, such as react](https://www.npmjs.com/package/htm)
- [lit-html, a html templating library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lit-html)
- [lit-element, integrates lit-html with web components](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lit-element)
- [haunted, a functional web components library with react-like hooks](https://www.npmjs.com/package/haunted)
- [hybrids, another functional web component library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hybrids)
- [hyperHTML, a html templating library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hyperhtml)

> (TODO: more libraries?)

Author: Anyone got suggestions for this?

Reviewer: show an example of loading html as a string with `import(htmlFile).then(handleAsText)`

Author: Im not sure, is that really realistic and feasible?

Reviewer: it's how `<html-include>` works https://github.com/justinfagnani/html-include-element/blob/b06b172348b8deecd71df3d0015e0f1f31023509/html-include-element.js#L74

Reviewer: * meant `fetch`

Author: Added a section on this

For syntax highlighting you might need to configure your IDE or install a plugin.

### CSS
For HTML and JSON there are sufficient alternatives. Unfortunately with CSS it is more complicated. By itself CSS is not modular as it affects the entire page. A common complaint that this is what makes CSS so difficult to scale.

There a lot of different ways to write css, it's beyond the scope of this article to look into all of them. When working without a build, regular stylesheets will just work fine of course.

If you are using some kind of CSS preprocessor you can run it before running your web server and just load the CSS output. Many CSS in JS solutions should also work if the library publishes an es module format.

#### Shadow dom

> For truly modular CSS I recommend looking into [Shadow dom](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Web_Components/Using_shadow_DOM), it fixes many of the scoping and encapsulation problems of CSS. Unfortunately, it's not yet a complete story. There are still missing features that are being worked out in the standard so it may not yet be the right solution in all scenarios. (TODO: Link to article?)

Author: I remember there was an article on some of the issues with shadow dom. Does anyone know which one that is? Was it from web padawan?

Author: Got it: https://dev.to/webpadawan/beyond-the-polyfills-how-web-components-affect-us-today-3j0a

Good to mention here is [the lit-element library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lit-element), which offers a great developer experience when authoring modular CSS without a build step. `lit-element` does most of the heavy lifting for you. You author css using tagged template literals, which are just syntax sugar for creating a [Constructable Stylesheet](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/constructable-stylesheets). This way you can write and share CSS between your components. This will integrate well with css modules when they are shipped.

> 

Reviewer: is it possible to import css files as text, construct a stylesheet from them, and append to the shadow root?

Author: You mean today or when css modules ship?

Author: You can use fetch to grab a css files but its hard to optimize for production

Author: Added a section on this.

Nowadays, developers can set up systems which transform their code from one syntax to another, turning it into code that actually runs in the browsers. To aid debugging, source maps need to be configured carefully between the different tools, so that we can still recognize and debug our code in the browser.

Imagine whats it's like for a newcomer or even an experienced developer:
- They first need to learn a lot of different tools before they can get their code to actually run
- Their IDE and linter won't understand the syntax of this new framework that was recommended to them by a friend, so they have to look for some extra plugins
- After that they run into some more errors... Turns out they wanted to keep it simple and not use typescript, but they didn't configure the babel plugins for decorators correctly in the right order so the project didn't compile

It may sound exaggerated, but this experience is common to a lot of developers. You may have jumped through similar hoops yourself.

> I feel that's really a shame. One of the key selling points of the web is and always was that's an easy and open format. It should be easy to just get started right away without a lot of configuration, tooling, pomp, and ceremony.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I feel that's really a shame. One of the key selling points of the web is and always was that it's an easy and open format. It should be easy to just get started right away without a lot of configuration, tooling, pomp, and ceremony.
```

pomp?

Reviewer: faff

Reviewer 3: faff?

Reviewer 3: Huh. TIL.

(there's a typo fix in the suggestion btw, dont forget)

Author: Thanks. Made the pomp faff bit shorter :)

> I'm not criticizing any of the tools, they have a role and a purpose. And for a long time it was the only real way to build complex applications on the web, as the web standards and browser implementations were just not there to support modern web development. They really helped push web development forward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I'm not criticizing any of those tools, they have all have a role and a purpose. And for a long time it was the only real way to build complex applications on the web, as web standards and browser implementations were just not there to support modern web development. They really helped push web development forward.
```

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!

![](./images/modules.png)

This seems trivial, but it is extremely useful and something we did not have before with classic scripts. We no longer need to coordinate dependencies somewhere central or maintain a base url. Modules can declare their own dependencies, and we can import any module without knowing what their dependencies are. The browser takes care of requesting the correct files.

### Dynamic imports
When building any serious web application we are usually going to need to do some form of lazy loading for best performance. With the browser's module system we can do this using dynamic imports. Static imports like we saw before always need to exist on the top level.

For example we cannot write:
```javascript
if (someCondition) {
  import './bar.js';
}
```

This is what dynamic imports are for. Dynamic imports can import a module at any time. It returns a promise that resolves with the imported module.

For example let's update the `app.js` example we created above:
```javascript
window.addEventListener('click', async () => {
  const module = await import('./message.js');

  console.log(`The message is: ${module.message}`);
});
```

> Now we are not importing the message module right away, but delaying it until the user has clicked anywhere on the page. We can await the promise returned from the import and interact with the modules. Any exported members are avaible on the module object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we are not importing the message module right away, but delaying it until the user has clicked anywhere on the page. We can await the promise returned from the import and interact with the modules. Any exported members are available on the module object.
```

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!

      "lodash-es/": "./node_modules/lodash-es/"
    }
  }
</script>
```

It's currently [implemented in chrome behind a flag](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/03/kv-storage#import_maps), and it's easy to shim on other browsers [with es-module-shims](https://www.npmjs.com/package/es-module-shims). Until we get broad browser support, that can be an interesting option during development.

If you don't want to go quite as cutting edge but still want to use the bare imports a great option is to use a web server which rewrites the bare imports on the fly into explicit paths before serving them to the browser. There are some servers available that do this. I recommend [es-dev-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/es-dev-server), read more about it at the end of this article.

### Caching
Because we aren't bundling all of our code into just a few files, we don't have to set up any elaborate caching strategies. Your web server can use the file system's last modified timestamp to return a 304 if the file hasn't changed.

You can test this in your browser by turning off `Disable cache` and refreshing:

![](./images/caching.png)

## Non-js modules

> So far we've only looked into javascript modules, and the story is looking pretty complete. It looks like we've got the tools needed to build different kinds of applications. But on the web we're not just writing javascript, we need to deal with other langauges as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So far we've only looked into javascript modules, and the story is looking pretty complete. It looks like we've got the tools needed to build different kinds of applications. But on the web we're not just writing javascript, we need to deal with other languages as well.
```

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!

The good news is that there are proposals for HTML, CSS and JSON modules and all major browser vendors seem to be supportive of them:
- [json modules](https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/4315)
- [html modules](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/645)
- [css modules](https://github.com/w3c/webcomponents/issues/759)

The bad news is that they're not available just yet, and it will be a while for all browsers to support them. We have to look for some solutions in the meantime.

### JSON
In Node JS it's possible to import JSON files from javascript. These becomes available as javascript object. In web projects this is used frequently as well. There are many build tool plugins to make this possible.

> Until browsers support JSON modules, we can either just use a javascript module or use fetch to retreive the JSON files. See the `import.meta.url` section of an example of using fetch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until browsers support JSON modules, we can either just use a javascript module or use fetch to retrieve the JSON files. See the `import.meta.url` section of an example of using fetch.
```

I Before E Except After C

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!

### HTML
Over time web frameworks have solved HTML templating in different ways, for example by placing HTML inside javascript strings. Lately JSX has become a popular format for embedding HTML inside javascript, but it is not going to run natively in the browser without some kind of transformation.

> If you really want to author HTML in HTML files, you could use `fetch` to download your HTML templates before using it with whatever rendering/component system you are using. I don't recommend this becuase as it's hard to optimize for production. You want something that can be statically anylzed and optimized by a bundler, so that you don't spawn a lot of requests in production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you really want to author HTML in HTML files, you could use `fetch` to download your HTML templates before using it with whatever rendering/component system you are using. I don't recommend this because as it's hard to optimize for production. You want something that can be statically anylzed and optimized by a bundler, so that you don't spawn a lot of requests in production.
```

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!

This will integrate well with CSS modules when they are shipped. We could emulate CSS modules by using fetch, but like we saw with HTML it's hard to optimize this for production use. I'm not a fan of CSS in JS, but I really feel that lit-element's solution is different and very elegant. You're writing CSS in a JS file, but you're still writing valid CSS syntax. If you like to keep things pure, you can just create a my-styles.css.js file and use a default export of just a stylesheet.

### Library support
Luckily the amount of libraries shipping as es module format is growing steadily. But there are still popular libraries which only as ship UMD or CommonJS. These don't work without some kind of code transformation. The best thing we can do it open issues on these projects to give them an indication how many people are interested in supporting the native module syntax.

I think this is a problem that will disappear relatively quickly, especially after Node JS implements es modules as well. Many projects already use es modules as their authoring format, and I don't think anyone likes having to ship multiple module formats.

## Building

> The goal of this article was to explore workflows where we don't need to do any building for development, and I think we've proven it's really possible. However it's important to reitarate that I don't think that build tools are evil, or that I want to pretend that noone will need to use any building at all during development.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The goal of this article was to explore workflows where we don't need to do any building for development, and I think we've proven it's really possible. However it's important to reiterate that I don't think that build tools are evil, or that I want to pretend that no one will need to use any building at all during development.
```

Author: This got outdated, so I can't apply the changes anymore. Applied it manually, thanks!
